# Overview

SPEAR stands for **Stablecoin Payments, Exchange, and Remittances**. Our vision of the future is a world where anyone can carry out these essential financial activities using a fully-backed and insured stablecoin over a high-speed and inexpensive blockchain network that is also decentralized and secure. We are building SPEAR Protocol, a scalable Ethereum commit-chain with a non-custodial token bridge and low fees paid by a native stablecoin. Below is a quick summary of its design:

* Multi-layer architecture inspired by [Polygon’s Matic network](https://finematics.com/polygon-matic-explained/) composed of a scalable EVM-compatible block production layer with instant finality (using [Tendermint](https://docs.tendermint.com/master/introduction/what-is-tendermint.html)) and a decentralized permissionless PoW security layer for staking and validator management.
* The Spartan DAO, a representative governance system overseeing SPEAR Protocol that has a fair distribution (via PoW) and no premine.
* Dual-token model comprised of a USD-pegged RToken for paying transaction fees and a staking coin for aligning validator incentives and DAO voting.
* Secure non-custodial bridge on the Ethereum network powered by the [NOCUST protocol](https://eprint.iacr.org/2018/642.pdf), giving users the ability to exit the commit-chain at any time circumventing the mass exit problem of Plasma chains.

Cryptocurrencies, together with blockchain technology that power them, promise a financial system that is fairer, more efficient, and less opaque that would benefit individuals as well as society at large. To gain and maximize these benefits, crypto must first achieve critical mass by becoming a compelling alternative to traditional finance as a decentralized, secure, scalable, and stable form of money. Stable chains is one pathway to such a future by solving the scalability and stability challenges that are currently hindering true adoption in the real world. It is our mission to build the stable chain of the future that would open the door for crypto mass adoption.
